Known, historic Snowy plover breeding area within PORE are surveyed for breeding adults. Six survey areas are used: four on Point Reyes Beach, one on Limantour Beach, and one on Drake's Beach. The areas of these survey areas are depicted on page 6 in the protocol attached to this package (Adams 2014). Throughout the census survey, observers walk below the high-tide line while keeping the entire width of the beach in their field of view. Every 50-100m, observers stop to scan the area ahead for plovers. If a plover is located on the beach, observers approach as close as 10 m to determine the plover's age, sex, and the color band combination on its leg(s) (if any). After recording the date, location (by sub-area, pre-determined landmarks, and/or GPS coordinates), and time of sighting, observers walk around the bird(s) to prevent flushing, continuing the survey.

Nests are located using three methods: (1) systematically searching microhabitats in which plovers are likely to nest; (2) watching potential breeding adults from a concealed position; and (3) following plover footprints in fine sand. Once a nest is located, it is immediately enclosed with a 3-m × 3-m square fence. The spatial coordinates are obtained for each nest using GPS units. Nests are checked two to four times a week to verify if they are still active. If a nest is not active during a particular visit, then a cause of loss is determined and recorded. Near the nest's projected hatching date, checks are made more frequently to determine the precise hatch day. Adults and chicks are looked for on follow-up visits; once found, the number of chicks and the location of the sighting are recorded. If chicks are determined to be lost, then the timing and cause of the loss is estimated and recorded. The chicks are monitored until 28 days after hatching, when they are considered fledged.

In addition to monitoring the Snowy plover breeding population size and reproductive success, collection of presence/absence and abundance information on the number of human, pet dogs (leashed and unleashed), and other potential predators is collected. The observers conduct these surveys along Snowy plover breeding beaches during census surveys and nest check surveys. It is recognized that because these data are not currently collected with systematic, standardized sample efforts, the relationship between ancillary data collected on predator populations and plover population trends cannot be determined with statistical estimates of certainty.

Additional Protocol methods and details are defined in the Snowy Plover Monitoring document found at: https://irma.nps.gov/DataStore/Reference/Profile/2215640
